.TH irsim-analyzer 3 "" "" "IRSIM USER'S MANUAL"
.SH NAME
.nh
irsim-analyzer
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B analyzer \fInode...\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
The analyzer provides a graphical interface to irsim; displaying the
state of the nodes (or vectors)
.I node...

Every invocation of the
.B analyzer
command adds a new set of signals to the display list.

The view is split into 3 regions: a trace window, a text window, and a
banner.  The banner displays the name of the simulation (from the sim file),
and the
.I pull-down
menu headers.
The text window is a 1-line window used to request and display certain
information.
.PP
The trace window displays the following information:
.IP "\fBleft side: \fP" 13
names of the signals (nodes/vectors) displayed.
.IP "\fBtop side: \fP" 13
On the left and right sides, the time corresponding to the left and right
edges of the trace window.  In the center, the time of the current
.I cursor
position.
.IP "\fBright side: \fP" 13
Values of the signals under the cursor.

.SH MENU FUNCTIONS
.IP \fBzoom:\fP +14em
.sp 0
\fBin  \fP Zooms in by a factor of 2 (magnify).

\fBout \fP Zooms out by a factor of 2 (reduce).
.IP \fBbase:\fP 7
Changes the numerical base used to display
the value of the selected vector
(see below how to select a trace) to one of the following:
.sp 0.7
\fBbin \fP (base 2)
.sp 0.7
\fBoct \fP (base 8)
.sp 0.7
\fBhex \fP (base 16)
.PP
.B window:1
.RS
.sp 0
.IP "\fBdelta T\fP" 12
Allows to determine the difference (in time) between any two
edges.   First click the mouse (any button) to the right of the first edge,
then to the left of the second edge.  The time of the two edges as well as
their difference will be shown in the text window.  As long as the button
remains depressed, a line is shown between the two edges.  Times are all
shown in ns.
.IP "\fBmove to \fP" 12
Moves the left edge of the trace window to the specified time.  The time
is requested in the text window.
.IP "\fBset width \fP" 12
Sets the number of ns. that will be displayed.  The time is requested in
the text window.
.IP "\fBname length \fP" 12
Since the most important differentiating information in a long signal name
is usually at the end, the analyzer will display the last 15 characters
of a signal name.  This option allows changing the maximum number of
characters that will be displayed, which must be in the range [8-256].
.IP "\fBscroll \fP" 12
Usually the analyzer displays simulation activity by scrolling the traces
to the left, so the last changes are shown. The
.I scroll
feature enables/disables this scrolling, effectively freezing the
traces.  When scrolling is enabled, a check mark is shown on this menu entry.
.RE
.IP \fBprint:\fP 8
These options control the generation of a PostScript file suitable for
obtaining a hardcopy of the trace window.
.RS
.IP \fBfile\fP 8
Requests the filename to hold the PostScript output.  Hitting
.I <return>
will use the default name (shown in parens).  Hitting
.I <ctrl-C>
will abort generation of the file.  The following menu entries control
the aspect of the PostScript file; a check mark in the corresponding menu entry
implies that the feature will be included in the output.
.IP \fBbanner\fP 8
Generate a banner, showing the simulation name and current date.
.IP \fBlegend\fP 8
Generate (in a separate page) a description of the signals displayed: the
.I complete
names of nodes (since the first characters may be stripped), and for vectors
the names of the nodes of wich it is composed.
.IP \fBtimes\fP 8
Generate a time ruler at the bottom of the traces.
.IP \fBoutline\fP 8
Draw an outline around the trace window.
.RE
.SH MOUSE FUNCTIONS
The analyzer provides various functions depending on where in the window
a mouse button is depressed.  All buttons have the same meaning, except
inside the scrollbar.  Pressing a mouse button in the following regions
will provide:
.TP
.B Signal names:
The signal name where the button was depressed will be highlighted and will
be moved to the position where the button is released, scrolling the other
traces if necessary.  If the button is released under the same signal on
which it was pressed, that signal will become
.I selected.
The selected signal is always underlined, and some information regarding
that signal is printed in the text window.
.sp 1
If the button is released outside the traces area (above or below) the
signal will be removed from the display.  It can only be added again by
invoking the
.B analyzer
command.
.TP
.B Left Arrow:
The traces are scrolled left by half a
.I page
(move back in time).
.TP
.B Right Arrow:
The traces are scrolled right by half a
.I page
(move forward in time).
.TP
.B Double Left Arrow:
Scrolls traces left by a full
.I page.
.TP
.B Double Right Arrow:
Scrolls traces right by a full
.I page.
.TP
.B Scrollbar:
The
.B left button
allows to
.I stretch
the left side of the window, thereby zooming in/out by an arbitrary
amount.  The right side of the window remains the same.
.sp 1
The
.B right button
allows to
.I stretch
the right side of the window, thereby zooming in/out by an arbitrary
amount.  The left side of the window remains the same.
.sp 1
The
.B middle button
moves the whole view back and forth in time.  The magnification factor
remains the same.
.TP
.B Traces
.sp 0
The
.I cursor
is moved to the time-step where the mouse is clicked.  Some lack of accuracy
in selecting the time may become apparent due to screen resolution
round off.
.sp 1
Holding down the
.I shift
key simultaneously with the mouse button will
.B not
move the
.I cursor,
but rather show the value of the signal at the time-step where the mouse is
clicked.  The value is printed in the text window using the following format:
.HP
		\fIname \fB@ \fI time:\fBvalue=\fIvalue\fB,input=\fIstatus\fP
.IP
The
.I value
is always shown in binary, regardless of the base selected for that signal.
The
.I status
is a string showing which nodes where inputs at that time.  Nodes that were
inputs have an
.B i
in their respective position, otherwise an
.B \-.
.TP
.B Cursor Values:
The selected signal value is highlighted and, when the button is released,
the value of the signal is
.I expanded
in the text window.  This is useful for displaying each of the bits that
make up a vector.  The information printed has the following format:
.sp 1
.ti +6
\fIname\fB:value=\fIvalue\fB input=\fIstatus\fP
.sp 1
where
.I value
and
.I status
have the same meaning as above.
.TP
.B Banner:
Clicking on the banner brings the window to the foreground.
.TP
.B Box on Banner:
Clicking in the
.I little
box on the left side of the banner iconizes the analyzer window.  To
de-iconize the window, simply click any button within the icon.
.TP
.B Banner Menus:
Pressing a mouse button in one of the banner menus (on the right side) will
pull down the corresponding menu.


.SH X DEFAULTS
The analyzer application uses the appropriate resource specification
at startup time to customize the appearance of its window.  The format for a
resource specification in the .Xdefaults file is:
.IP
     [name.]resource:  value
.PP
For the analyzer, the available names are
.B irsim
and
.B analyzer.
The available resources are:

.IP "\fBbackground\fP" 15
Specifies the traces window background color. The default is black.
.IP "\fBforeground\fP" 15
Specifies the text color, or the background of everything else besides
the traces window.  The default is white.
.IP "\fBgeometry\fP" 15
Specifies the default geometry (window size and screen location) of the
graphic window.  The default Xgeometry is "=1000x300+0+0".
.IP "\fBreverseVideo\fP" 15
Specifies whether the foreground and background colors are to be
reversed (on monochrome displays only).  The default is off.
.IP "\fBfont\fP" 15
Specifies the fixed-width font displayed.  The default is 6x13.
.IP "\fBborderWidth\fP" 15
Specifies the width of the border (in pixels).  The default is 2.
.IP "\fBborderColor\fP" 15
Specifies the border color when the window is selected.  The default is black.
.IP "\fBhighlight\fP" 15
Specifies the color used for highlighting.  The default is
red (color displays only).
.IP "\fBtraceColor\fP" 15
Specifies the color in which the traces are drawn.  The default is white.
.IP "\fBbannerBg\fP" 15
Specifies the background color for the banner.  The default is white.
.IP "\fBbannerFg\fP" 15
Specifies the foreground (text) color for the banner.  The default is black.

.SH SEE ALSO
irsim(1)
